New OD pratical (#118)
ITSLeeds/TDS: practicals/2-od.Rmd

---
title: "Origin-destination data"
subtitle: '<br/>Practical'

> author: "Malcolm Morgan"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
author: "Malcolm Morgan and Robin Lovelace"
```

pkgs = c(
  "nycflights13",# data package
  "pct",         # package for getting travel data in the UK
  "sf",          # spatial data package
  "stats19",     # downloads and formats open stats19 crash data
  "stplanr",     # for working with origin-destination and route data
  "tidyverse",   # a package for user friendly data science
  "tmap"         # for making maps
)
remotes::install_cran(pkgs)
remotes::install_github("nowosad/spDataLarge")
```
If you need to install any of these packages use:

Load the tidyverse package as follows:
```{r echo = T, results = 'hide', eval = FALSE}
install.packages("sf")  # Install a package from CRAN
remotes::install_github("Nowosad/spDataLarge")   # install from GitHub using the remotes package
```

```{r}
library(tidyverse)
```{r echo = T, results = 'hide', warning=FALSE, message=FALSE}
library(sf)          # vector data package 
library(tidyverse)   # tidyverse packages
```

# Project set-up and tidyverse testing
- It relies on **spData**, which loads datasets used in the code examples of this chapter:

```{r 03-attribute-operations-2, echo = T, results = 'hide',warning=FALSE, message=FALSE}
library(spData)  # spatial data package 
```

> 1. Check your packages are up1.to-date with `update.packages()`

Reviewer: :+1: to typo fix

> 1. Create an RStudio project with an appropriate name for this module (e.g. `TDSmodule`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create an RStudio project with an appropriate name for this session (e.g. `practical2`)
```

The old one doesn't really follow from last week when they created a project called `practical`:

https://github.com/ITSLeeds/TDS/blob/28205a0d1d3766a56afae96c876448ef2f5e4601/practicals/1-intro.Rmd#L120

> 1. Create appropriate folders for code, data and anything else (e.g. images)

Reviewer: Do we need this? May be over-complicating this at this stage.

Author: I've left it in, it basic setup that they should be able to do by now

# Getting started with OD data

In this section we will look at basic transport data in the R package **stplanr**.

Load the  `stplanr` package as follows:

```{r, echo = T, results = 'hide'}
library(stplanr)
```

The `stplanr` package contains some data that we can use to demonstrate principles in Data Science, illustrated in the Figure below. Source: Chapter 1 of R for Data Science [@grolemund_r_2016] [available online](https://r4ds.had.co.nz/introduction.html).

![](https://d33wubrfki0l68.cloudfront.net/571b056757d68e6df81a3e3853f54d3c76ad6efc/32d37/diagrams/data-science.png)

First we will load some sample data:

```{r, echo=FALSE}
od_data = stplanr::od_data_sample
```

You can click on the data in the environment panel to view it or use `head(od_data)`
Now we will rename one of the columns from `foot` to `walk`

```{r, echo=FALSE}
od_data = od_data %>%
  rename(walk = foot)
```

Next we will made a new dataset `od_data_walk` by taking `od_data` and piping it (`%>%`) to `filter` the data frame to only include rows where `walk > 0`. Then `select` a few of the columns and calculate two new columns `proportion_walk` and `proportion_drive`.

```{r, echo=FALSE}

> od_data_walk = od_data %>% 

Reviewer: :+1:

```{r}
desire_lines$distance_direct_m = as.numeric(st_length(desire_lines))
```

Note the use of `as.numeric` by default `st_length` and many other functions return a special type of result with `unit`. Here we force the results back into the basic R numerical value. But be careful! The units you get back depend on the coordinate reference system, so check your data before you assume what values mean.

```{r, warning=FALSE, message=FALSE}
ggplot(desire_lines) +
  geom_point(aes(x = distance_direct_m, y = Active, size = all)) +
  geom_smooth(aes(x = distance_direct_m, y = Active))
```

The blue line is a smoothed average of the data. It shows a common concept in transport research, the distance decay curve. In this case it shows that the longer the journey the less likely people are to use active travel. But this concept applies to all kinds of travel decisions. For example you are more likely to travel to a nearby coffee shop than a far away coffee shop. Different types of trip have different curves, but most people always have a bias for shorter trips.

# Homework

> 1. Read Chapters 2-5, 7, and 8 of [Geocomputation with R](https://r.geocompx.org/transport.html) 

Reviewer: That's quite a lot to get through, I suggest making 7 and 8 bonus questions.

I'd rather everyone did the basics than asking too much and nobody completes the homework.

Author: I've made more bonus work
